---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/2/
type: stop
section_title: Guwan
# title:
page_rank: 2
stop_id: 2
audio_file: Stop-2.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: Stop-2-hero.jpg
   alt_text: Dancer in costume
   caption: "Bardi dancer Moochoo Frank Davey Jnr.<br />Courtesy Jordan Shields"
 - path: 02-01-Kim-Akerman.jpg
   alt_text: Headshot of a man
   caption: Kim Akerman, Anthropologist
 - path: 02-02-Paul-Sampl-Janganbirr.jpg
   alt_text: Headshot of a man
   caption: Paul Sampi Janganbirr, Bardi elder
 - path: 02-03-Aubrey-Tigan-Galiwa.jpg
   alt_text: Headshot of a man
   caption: Aubrey Tigan Galiwa, Malaya elder
 - path: 02-04-Russell-Davey-Jooda.jpg
   alt_text: Headshot of a man
   caption: "Russell 'Wossy' Davey Jooda, Pearlshell carver"
---

## Introduction

Some of the first people to appreciate the power and beauty of pearlshell were the coastal Aboriginal groups of the northwest Kimberley coast. Collecting the shell on the king tides, these people have shaped and engraved pearlshell to celebrate country and traditions. People continue to value both *guwan* (undecorated shell) and *riji* (engraved shell) in dance and ceremony, and as an important item of exchange.	

## Trading

### Kim Akerman, Anthropologist:

"One of the things about the Kimberly pearlshell, particularly the engraved shell, because they are so distinctive, they were used by a number of people to start to actually construct maps of some of these ancient trade routes. These networks went across the continent. Pearlshell probably covered more than two thirds of Australia, Kimberly pearlshell. Western Queensland. They were recorded at Kalgoorlie. They were recorded along the Trans Line. There are photos of Noongar people from south west of Western Australia, that where pearlshell by different Aboriginal names at various ancient trade routes."

### Paul Sampi Janganbirr, Bardi elder:

"*Anyja*, its like something that was given to you, and you got to give back. That’s *Anyja*. Give something back. Like Aboriginals don’t have… they probably have boomerangs, or spears or a whole lot of pearlshell. So they give that away, you know. You give  something back like steel or whatever. Oh, old, old people did the same thing with, even with probably turtle, or dugong or spears, boomerang. You give it to the man and say, see if I wanted it or not, I give you shell and I take you away. I pay you. I pay for you with the shell and I take you. Both Laws, you know, I mean in both communities, like, different Laws. We all got different sacred stuff. And then we pay with shell or whatever, you know."

### Aubrey Tigan Galiwa, Mayala elder and pearlshell carver:

"Oh, all these is trading men, well, trading before for give him this, give him that. Fellas from Jigalong and all that. Catch all them, in the picture, old, old  picture, you know. Jigalong mob. Some, they went around Wyndham way. All around there. Even go inland. Maybe I don’t know as far as where, but around inland."

## Carving shell

### Russell 'Wossy' Davey Jooda, Pearlshell carver:

"I’m a *Bardi* man. I started, I did a couple of pearlshells for, a couple of *riji* for the *Bardi* dancers. And that was with my dad, then. We sat down together and did a design. I did a design, and he gave me the okay. And then I carved it, and he showed me how to put the ochre on there, and wipe it off. And then, yeah, he was, he sort of gave me the, yeah, gave me the tick to start carving pearlshell for like proper *riji*, yeah."

### Aubrey Tigan Galiwa, Mayala elder and pearlshell carver:

"Talking to old uncle. He said, 'I want a *riij*.' And he just threw them in the sand, 'This kind *riij*, this kind, this kind.' Look at them. He had no pencil. He don’t believe in pencil. 'This one. This one proper *ram* [engraved lines] from *Iwany* [Sunday Island]. *Ram*, that hold everybody in one'.  Next day we start with chisel and three-corner file, six-inches nail. It took us 2 to 3 weeks. 'And I want a good one', he say, 'And when you finish it, put on the *biidamar* properly'. Red ochre got some 'Here uncle' we say. He know how long it took us. He laughed. 'Well, from today on, nobody can’t tell you what to do. You clean the shell. You make a *riij* for use. Then I give them to someone else, to pass him on to his son'. He said, 'Its done and over now. Finished'. Once its finished you don't talk about it. 'You are a proper *aamba*'. You know, boss. And you got to be the boss. He’d been the boss for his mob. I’ve been boss for my mob. And that's how we been. You do your *riji*, you do your carving, anytime, long as from Saltwater. Nobody can stop you. *Boogan liyan  waningarra juwar* I’m telling you to. That's your Law, your Saltwater Law.

I carve shell for ceremony, for dancing, for our cultural rites. The designs are our history, about the country, about our young people, about old people. If I drop that, we chuck it away, we are lost. You make *riji*, when you teach anyone, they do that, they keep going you know."